---
layout: archive
title: "Research"
permalink: /research/
author_profile: true
redirect_from:
  - /resume
---

{% include base_path %}


## The balance of external and internal attention

In daily life, people often have to switch attention between external and internal sources of information. For example, when grocery shopping, you might direct your attention (externally) toward scanning the shelves for the product you are looking for, after which you need to switch your attention (internally) to the next item of your memorized grocery list (Verschooren, Schindler, et al., 2019). In my PhD research, I have found that switching attention between these two sources is asymmetrical, in the sense that there is a larger cost for switching to internal than to external attention (Verschooren, Liefooghe, et al., 2019). In a series of experiments, we then compared different theoretical explanations and found that an internal shielding benefit best explains this cost asymmetry (Verschooren, Pourtois, & Egner, 2020). In my later theoretical work, I have linked this internal shielding benefit to a wide range of literatures speaking to the balancing of external versus internal attention, including research on working memory, attention switching, visual search, mind wandering, sustained attention, mental effort, and meditation (Verschooren & Egner, 2023). I argue that major findings in these disparate research lines can be coherently understood under this principle, which I termed the Internal Dominance over External Attention (IDEA) hypothesis.

The next step in this research line is to investigate this balance of external and internal attention when taking mind wandering and external distraction into account. People often choose to distract themselves, either externally (e.g., looking at their phone) or internally (e.g., thinking about weekend plans). It is currently not clear how, when, or why people (choose to) become distracted, but this is a pressing issue, as distraction is omnipresent in our society, obstructing our capacity to focus both on personal goals and the many challenges humanity faces. To advance our understanding on how distraction occurs, we must overcome the current practice in which different attentional states are studied in isolation. I propose to capture the different research fields on attention in a single space defined by the dimensions “direction” (external vs. internal) and “locus” (on-task vs. distracted), distinguishing four attentional states (i.e., On-Task-External, On-Task-Internal, External Distraction, and Mind Wandering). The objective of this project is to map the dynamical transitions between these states and to causally influence the amount of time people spend in each of them. I will use behavioral measures, eye-tracking, and pupillometry to capture these states and quantify the dwelling times and a transition matrix through computational modeling. Inspired by recent empirical work on attention switching and neurobiological models of mind wandering, I hypothesize (i) the existence of an Off-Focus state through which these dynamical transitions occur, (ii) that internal bias and goal value determine which areas are visited most, and (iii) that contextual manipulations can alter the relative times spent in each area. Bridging these different fields of attentional research will increase cross-talk between them and provide building blocks for interventions targeting healthy attentional engagement. I have recently been awarded a Marie Skłodowska-Curie Action grant to carry out this research at the Arctic University of Tromso (starting summer of 2025).

## Voluntary control over the internal body

When it comes to body movements in space (i.e., somatomotor actions), people can easily learn fine-grained voluntary control, for example when manipulating tiny objects. Ideomotor theory states that people control these movements by anticipating – or attempting to bring about – their sensory consequences (e.g., visual feedback of an arm movement). Compared to somatomotor actions, voluntarily controlling visceromotor actions inside the body, such as decreasing heart rate or increaing skin temperature, is much more difficult and requires dedicated training (e.g., practicing yoga or mediation). It is currently not clear how such control is acquired or why it is more difficult. To address this question, I propose the ideomotor hypothesis of voluntary visceromotor control, which asserts that voluntary control of somato- and visceromotor actions are governed by the same general principle, namely the anticipation of sensory feedback. This hypothesis explains why learning to control visceromotor responses is more difficult, as its feedback (i.e., interoceptive signals from the internal body) is of lower sensory quality than the afferent signal we receive from exteroaction (i.e., exteroceptive signals from the environment). I propose to test this hypothesis using autogenic and biofeedback training, which are two techniques aimed at acquiring voluntary control over visceromotor responses. While autogenic training uses the natural interoceptive consequences, biofeedback training objectively maps the interoceptive signal onto an exteroceptive stimulus. The results will indicate whether ideomotor theory indeed applies to visceromotor responses and will further inform about the relative effectiveness of  using extero- versus interoceptive signals for voluntary control learning. If confirmed, the ideomotor hypothesis can be used to push the naturally occurring boundaries of this voluntary control, which has several clinical applications. I have recently uploaded a preprint that provides a detailed account of this hypothesis and links it to the broader literature (Verschooren, Gaebler, & Brass, 2023).
